# rexexp-gen

## Contents ##

  * [What's New?](#whats-new)
  * [What Is It?](#what-is-it)
  * [How Does It Work?](#how-does-it-work)
    * [The basics](#the-basics)
    * [When you want longer matching strings](#when-you-want-longer-matching-strings)
    * [How to generate random matches repeatably](#how-to-generate-random-matches-repeatably)
    * [How to limit match length to a specific range](#how-to-limit-match-length-to-a-specific-range)
  * [FAQs](#faqs)

## What's New? ##

  * The latest version ([1.0.0](https://github.com/Cornutum/regexp-gen/releases/tag/release-1.0.0))
    is now available at the [Maven Central Repository](https://search.maven.org/search?q=regexp-gen).

## What Is It? ##

`regexp-gen` is a Java library that implements the `RegExpGen` interface. A `RegExpGen` generates
random strings that match a specified [regular expression](https://www.rexegg.com/). There could be
many applications for this capability, but it's especially useful for testing a system that uses
regular expressions to process its inputs.

## How Does It Work? ##

### The basics ###

Here's a simple example of how to use a `RegExpGen`. 

```java
import org.cornutum.regexpgen.RandomGen;
import org.cornutum.regexpgen.RegExpGen;
import org.cornutum.regexpgen.js.Parser;
import org.cornutum.regexpgen.random.RandomBoundsGen;

// Given a JavaScript regular expression...
String regexp = "^Regular expressions are ((odd|hard|stupid), )+but cool!$";

// ...and a random number generator...
RandomGen random = new RandomBoundsGen();

// ...create a RegExpGen instance...
RegExpGen generator = Parser.parseRegExp( regexp);

for( int i = 0; i < 3; i++)
  {
  // ... and generate matching strings
  System.out.println( generator.generate( random));
  }
```

Run this example and you'll see output something like this:

```
Regular expressions are hard, but cool!
Regular expressions are hard, odd, stupid, but cool!
Regular expressions are odd, odd, but cool!
```

### When you want longer matching strings ###

For any regular expression, there is always a miniumum length for any matching string.  Sometimes
matches are also limited to some maximum length. `RegExpGen` generates matches of random length that
always lie within the minimum and maximum bounds for the regular expression.

But for many regular expressions, like the one in the previous example, there is no upper bound on
the length of a matching string. Nevertheless, as a practical matter, some kind of upper bound is
usually helpful.  What to do?

The `RandomBoundGen` class offers a way to control this. When choosing a length from an unbounded
range, `RandomBoundGen` picks a random value that exceeds the minimum by only a limited amount. It
uses a [Poisson distribution](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Poisson_distribution) to ensure that
most lengths above the minimum are near a specified average value and very rarely exceed the minimum
by a lot. By default, `RandomBoundsGen` will limit values to an average of 16 more than the minimum.

But what if you'd like to create longer matches? Here's how to change the `lambda` parameter of a `RandomBoundsGen`
to define a larger average increment above minimum:


```java
...
// ...and a random number generator that limits the length of unbounded matches to
// to an average of minimum + 64 ..
RandomGen random = new RandomBoundsGen( 64);
...
```
Run with this change and you'll see output something like this:

```
Regular expressions are odd, but cool!
Regular expressions are odd, odd, stupid, stupid, odd, but cool!
Regular expressions are odd, odd, odd, hard, odd, odd, odd, odd, stupid, but cool!
```

### How to generate random matches repeatably ###

If the random strings generated by `RegExpGen` cause a failure in the system you're testing, you
need to be sure you can repeat the test with the exact same results, in order to isolate the cause
of the failure and to verify a fix. But how?

To choose random values, `RandomBoundsGen` uses an instance of the standard Java
[`Random`](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/Random.html) class. By default,
`RandomBoundsGen` creates a new `Random` instance with a random initial seed value, in which case
the sequence of value generated is *not* repeatable. But you can make it repeatable by specifying
your own seed value, like this:

```java
...
// ...and a random number generator with a specific seed value...
RandomGen random = new RandomBoundsGen( new Random( mySeed));
...
```

### How to limit match length to a specific range ###

TBD


## FAQs ##

  * **Where's the Javadoc?**

    For full details, see the complete Javadoc [here](http://www.cornutum.org/regexp-gen/apidocs/).

  * **What flavor of regular expression syntax is supported?**

    TBD

  * **Are all possible regular expressions accepted?**

    TBD
